README.md, before:

EvalEx - Java Expression Evaluator
==========

[![Build](https://github.com/ezylang/EvalEx/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ezylang/EvalEx/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ezylang_EvalEx&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ezylang_EvalEx)
[![Security Rating](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ezylang_EvalEx&metric=security_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ezylang_EvalEx)
[![Vulnerabilities](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ezylang_EvalEx&metric=vulnerabilities)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ezylang_EvalEx)
[![Coverage](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ezylang_EvalEx&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ezylang_EvalEx)

| :warning: Version 3 of EvalEx is a complete rewrite of the popular expression evaluator. See [the new documentation area](https://ezylang.github.io/EvalEx/concepts/changes.html) for an overview of the changes.   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

EvalEx is a handy expression evaluator for Java, that allows to parse and evaluate expression
strings.

## Key Features:

- Supports numerical, boolean, string, array and structure expressions, operations and variables.
- Array and structure support: Arrays and structures can be mixed, building arbitrary data
  structures.
- Uses BigDecimal for numerical calculations.
- MathContext and number of decimal places can be configured, with optional automatic rounding.
- No dependencies to external libraries.
- Easy integration into existing systems to access data.
- Predefined boolean and mathematical operators.
- Predefined mathematical, boolean and string functions.
- Custom functions and operators can be added.
- Functions can be defined with a variable number of arguments (see MIN, MAX and SUM functions).
- Supports hexadecimal and scientific notations of numbers.
- Supports implicit multiplication, e.g. (a+b)(a-b) or 2(x-y) which equals to (a+b)\*(a-b) or 2\*(
  x-y)
- Lazy evaluation of function parameters (see the IF function) and support of sub-expressions.

## Documentation

The full documentation for EvalEx can be found
on [GitHub Pages](https://ezylang.github.io/EvalEx/)

## Discussion

For announcements, questions and ideas visit
the [Discussions area](https://github.com/ezylang/EvalEx/discussions).

## Examples

### A simple example, that shows how it works in general:

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("1 + 2 / (4 * SQRT(4))");

EvaluationValue result = expression.evaluate();

System.out.println(result.getNumberValue()); // prints 1.25
```

### Variables can be specified in the expression and their values can be passed for evaluation:

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("(a + b) * (a - b)");

EvaluationValue result = expression
    .with("a", 3.5)
    .and("b", 2.5)
    .evaluate();

System.out.println(result.getNumberValue()); // prints 6.00
```

### Boolean expressions produce a boolean result:

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("level > 2 || level <= 0");

EvaluationValue result = expression
    .with("level", 3.5)
    .evaluate();

System.out.println(result.getBooleanValue()); // prints true
```

### Like in Java, strings and text can be mixed:

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("\"Hello \" + name + \", you are \" + age")
    .with("name","Frank")
    .and("age",38);

System.out.println(expression.evaluate().getStringValue()); // prints Hello Frank, you are 38
```

### Arrays (also multidimensional) are supported and can be passed as Java _Lists_.

See the [Documentation](https://ezylang.github.io/pages-playground/concepts/datatypes.html#array)
for more details.

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("values[i-1] * factors[i-1]");

EvaluationValue result = expression
    .with("values", List.of(2, 3, 4))
    .and("factors", List.of(2, 4, 6))
    .and("i", 1)
    .evaluate();

System.out.println(result.getNumberValue()); // prints 4
```

### Structures are supported and can be passed as Java _Maps_.

Arrays and Structures can be combined to build arbitrary data structures. See
the [Documentation](https://ezylang.github.io/pages-playground/concepts/datatypes.html#structure)
for more details.

```java
Map<String, Object> order = new HashMap<>();
order.put("id", 12345);
order.put("name", "Mary");

Map<String, Object> position = new HashMap<>();
position.put("article", 3114);
position.put("amount", 3);
position.put("price", new BigDecimal("14.95"));

order.put("positions", List.of(position));

Expression expression = new Expression("order.positions[x].amount * order.positions[x].price")
    .with("order", order)
    .and("x", 0);

BigDecimal result = expression.evaluate().getNumberValue();

System.out.println(result); // prints 44.85
```

## Author and License

Copyright 2012-2022 by Udo Klimaschewski

**Thanks to all who contributed to this
project: [Contributors](https://github.com/ezylang/EvalEx/graphs/contributors)**

The software is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (
see [LICENSE](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ezylang/EvalEx/main/LICENSE) file).

* The *power of* operator (^) implementation was copied
  from [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3579779/how-to-do-a-fractional-power-on-bigdecimal-in-java)
  Thanks to Gene Marin
* The SQRT() function implementation was taken from the
  book [The Java Programmers Guide To numerical Computing](http://www.amazon.de/Java-Number-Cruncher-Programmers-Numerical/dp/0130460419) (
  Ronald Mak, 2002)

Commit message:

adds the getUndefinedVariables() method to Expression (#321)
also adds Maven information to README
also fixes Sonar shallow checkout warning

README.md, after:

EvalEx - Java Expression Evaluator
==========

[![Build](https://github.com/ezylang/EvalEx/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ezylang/EvalEx/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ezylang_EvalEx&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ezylang_EvalEx)
[![Security Rating](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ezylang_EvalEx&metric=security_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ezylang_EvalEx)
[![Vulnerabilities](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ezylang_EvalEx&metric=vulnerabilities)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ezylang_EvalEx)
[![Coverage](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ezylang_EvalEx&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ezylang_EvalEx)
[![Maven Central](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/com.ezylang/EvalEx.svg?label=Maven%20Central)](https://search.maven.org/search?q=a:%22EvalEx%22)

| :warning: Version 3 of EvalEx is a complete rewrite of the popular expression evaluator. See [the new documentation area](https://ezylang.github.io/EvalEx/concepts/changes.html) for an overview of the changes.   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

EvalEx is a handy expression evaluator for Java, that allows to parse and evaluate expression
strings.

## Key Features:

- Supports numerical, boolean, string, array and structure expressions, operations and variables.
- Array and structure support: Arrays and structures can be mixed, building arbitrary data
  structures.
- Uses BigDecimal for numerical calculations.
- MathContext and number of decimal places can be configured, with optional automatic rounding.
- No dependencies to external libraries.
- Easy integration into existing systems to access data.
- Predefined boolean and mathematical operators.
- Predefined mathematical, boolean and string functions.
- Custom functions and operators can be added.
- Functions can be defined with a variable number of arguments (see MIN, MAX and SUM functions).
- Supports hexadecimal and scientific notations of numbers.
- Supports implicit multiplication, e.g. (a+b)(a-b) or 2(x-y) which equals to (a+b)\*(a-b) or 2\*(
  x-y)
- Lazy evaluation of function parameters (see the IF function) and support of sub-expressions.

## Documentation

The full documentation for EvalEx can be found
on [GitHub Pages](https://ezylang.github.io/EvalEx/)

## Discussion

For announcements, questions and ideas visit
the [Discussions area](https://github.com/ezylang/EvalEx/discussions).

## Download / Including

You can download the binaries, source code and JavaDoc jars from
[Maven Central](https://search.maven.org/search?q=a:%22EvalEx%22).\
You will find there also copy/paste templates for including EvalEx in your project with build
systems like Maven or Gradle.

## Examples

### A simple example, that shows how it works in general:

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("1 + 2 / (4 * SQRT(4))");

EvaluationValue result = expression.evaluate();

System.out.println(result.getNumberValue()); // prints 1.25
```

### Variables can be specified in the expression and their values can be passed for evaluation:

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("(a + b) * (a - b)");

EvaluationValue result = expression
    .with("a", 3.5)
    .and("b", 2.5)
    .evaluate();

System.out.println(result.getNumberValue()); // prints 6.00
```

### Boolean expressions produce a boolean result:

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("level > 2 || level <= 0");

EvaluationValue result = expression
    .with("level", 3.5)
    .evaluate();

System.out.println(result.getBooleanValue()); // prints true
```

### Like in Java, strings and text can be mixed:

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("\"Hello \" + name + \", you are \" + age")
    .with("name","Frank")
    .and("age",38);

System.out.println(expression.evaluate().getStringValue()); // prints Hello Frank, you are 38
```

### Arrays (also multidimensional) are supported and can be passed as Java _Lists_.

See the [Documentation](https://ezylang.github.io/pages-playground/concepts/datatypes.html#array)
for more details.

```java
Expression expression = new Expression("values[i-1] * factors[i-1]");

EvaluationValue result = expression
    .with("values", List.of(2, 3, 4))
    .and("factors", List.of(2, 4, 6))
    .and("i", 1)
    .evaluate();

System.out.println(result.getNumberValue()); // prints 4
```

### Structures are supported and can be passed as Java _Maps_.

Arrays and Structures can be combined to build arbitrary data structures. See
the [Documentation](https://ezylang.github.io/pages-playground/concepts/datatypes.html#structure)
for more details.

```java
Map<String, Object> order = new HashMap<>();
order.put("id", 12345);
order.put("name", "Mary");

Map<String, Object> position = new HashMap<>();
position.put("article", 3114);
position.put("amount", 3);
position.put("price", new BigDecimal("14.95"));

order.put("positions", List.of(position));

Expression expression = new Expression("order.positions[x].amount * order.positions[x].price")
    .with("order", order)
    .and("x", 0);

BigDecimal result = expression.evaluate().getNumberValue();

System.out.println(result); // prints 44.85
```

## Author and License

Copyright 2012-2022 by Udo Klimaschewski

**Thanks to all who contributed to this
project: [Contributors](https://github.com/ezylang/EvalEx/graphs/contributors)**

The software is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (
see [LICENSE](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ezylang/EvalEx/main/LICENSE) file).

* The *power of* operator (^) implementation was copied
  from [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3579779/how-to-do-a-fractional-power-on-bigdecimal-in-java)
  Thanks to Gene Marin
* The SQRT() function implementation was taken from the
  book [The Java Programmers Guide To numerical Computing](http://www.amazon.de/Java-Number-Cruncher-Programmers-Numerical/dp/0130460419) (
  Ronald Mak, 2002)
