docs/references/functions.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Standard Functions
nav_order: 3
parent: References
---

## Standard Functions

Available through the _ExpressionConfiguration.StandardFunctionsDictionary_ constant:

### Basic Functions

| Name                                                                      | Description                                                                                                                                     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ABS(value)                                                                | Absolute (non-negative) value                                                                                                                   |
| AVERAGE(value, ...)                                                       | Returns the average (arithmetic mean) of all parameters.                                                                                        |
| CEILING(value)                                                            | Rounds the given value an integer using the rounding mode CEILING                                                                               |
| COALESCE(value, ...)                                                      | Returns the first non-null parameter, or NULL if all parameters are null                                                                        |
| FACT(base)                                                                | Calculates the factorial of a base value                                                                                                        |
| FLOOR(value)                                                              | Rounds the given value an integer using the rounding mode FLOOR                                                                                 |
| IF(condition, resultIfTrue, resultIfFalse)                                | Conditional evaluation function. If _condition_ is true, the _resultIfTrue_ is returned, else the _resultIfFalse_ value                         |
| LOG(value)                                                                | The natural logarithm (base e) of a value                                                                                                       |
| LOG10(value)                                                              | The base 10 logarithm of a value                                                                                                                |
| MAX(value, ...)                                                           | Returns the maximum value of all parameters. If a parameter is of type _ARRAY_, the maximum of all elements is calculated.                      |
| MIN(value, ...)                                                           | Returns the minimum value of all parameters. If a parameter is of type _ARRAY_, the minimum of all elements is calculated.                      |
| NOT(value)                                                                | Boolean negation, implemented as a function (for compatibility)                                                                                 |
| RANDOM()                                                                  | Produces a random value between 0 and 1                                                                                                         |
| ROUND(value, scale)                                                       | Rounds the given value to the specified scale, using the current rounding mode                                                                  |
| SQRT(value)                                                               | Square root function. Uses the implementation from _The Java Programmers Guide To numerical Computing_ by Ronald Mak, 2002.                     |
| SUM(value, ...)                                                           | Returns the sum of all parameters. If a parameter is of type _ARRAY_, the sum of all elements is calculated.                                    |
| SWITCH(expression, value1, result1, [value2-N, result2-N ...], [default]) | Returns the _result_ correponding to the first matching _value_ in the specified _expression_ or an optional _default_ value if no match found. |

### String Functions

| Name                                | Description                                                                                             |
|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| STR_CONTAINS(string, substring)     | Returns true if the string contains the substring (case-insensitive)                                    |
| STR_ENDS_WITH(string, substring)    | Returns true if the string ends with the substring (case-sensitive)                                     |
| STR_FORMAT(format [,argument, ...]) | Returns a formatted string using the specified format string and arguments, using the configured locale |
| STR_LOWER(value)                    | Converts the given value to lower case                                                                  |
| STR_STARTS_WITH(string, substring)  | Returns true if the string starts with the substring (case-sensitive)                                   |
| STR_TRIM(string)                    | Returns the given string with all leading and trailing space removed.                                   |
| STR_UPPER(value)                    | Converts the given value to upper case                                                                  |

### Trigonometric Functions

| Name         | Description                                                                                    |
|--------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ACOS(value)  | Returns the arc-cosine (in degrees)                                                            |
| ACOSH(value) | Returns the hyperbolic arc-cosine                                                              |
| ACOSR(value) | Returns the arc-cosine (in radians)                                                            |
| ACOT(value)  | Returns the arc-co-tangent (in degrees)                                                        |
| ACOTH(value) | Returns the hyperbolic arc-co-tangent (in degrees)                                             |
| ACOTR(value) | Returns the arc-co-tangent (in radians)                                                        |
| ASIN(value)  | Returns the arc-sine (in degrees)                                                              |
| ASINH(value) | Returns the hyperbolic arc-sine                                                                |
| ASINR(value) | Returns the arc-sine (in radians)                                                              |
| ATAN2(y, x)  | Returns the angle of atan2 (in degrees)                                                        |
| ATAN2R(y, x) | Returns the angle of atan2 (in radians)                                                        |
| ATAN(value)  | Returns the arc-tangent (in degrees)                                                           |
| ATANH(value) | Returns the hyperbolic arc-tangent                                                             |
| ATANR(value) | Returns the arc-tangent (in radians)                                                           |
| COS(value)   | Returns the cosine of an angle (in degrees)                                                    |
| COSH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic cosine of a value                                                       |
| COSR(value)  | Returns the cosine of an angle (in radians)                                                    |
| COT(value)   | Returns the co-tangent of an angle (in degrees)                                                |
| COTH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic co-tangent of a value                                                   |
| COTR(value)  | Returns the co-tangent of an angle (in radians)                                                |
| CSC(value)   | Returns the co-secant of an angle (in degrees)                                                 |
| CSCH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic co-secant of a value                                                    |
| CSCR(value)  | Returns the co-secant of an angle (in radians)                                                 |
| DEG(rad)     | Converts an angle measured in radians to an approximately equivalent angle measured in degrees |
| RAD(degrees) | Converts an angle measured in degrees to an approximately equivalent angle measured in radians |
| SEC(value)   | Returns the secant of an angle (in degrees)                                                    |
| SECH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic secant of an angle                                                      |
| SECR(value)  | Returns the secant of an angle (in radians)                                                    |
| SIN(value)   | Returns the sine of an angle (in degrees)                                                      |
| SINH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic sine of a value                                                         |
| SINR(value)  | Returns the sine of an angle (in radians)                                                      |
| TAN(value)   | Returns the tangent of an angle (in degrees)                                                   |
| TANH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic tangent of a value                                                      |
| TANR(value)  | Returns the tangent of an angle (in radians)                                                   |

### Date Time Functions

| Name                                                                           | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| DT_DATE_NEW(year, month, day [,hour, minute, second, millis, nanos] [,zoneId]) | Returns a new DATE_TIME value with the given parameters. An optional time zone (string) can be specified, e.g. "Europe/Berlin", or "GMT+02:00". If no zone id is specified, the configured zone id is used.                                                                        |
| DT_DATE_NEW(millis)                                                            | Returns a new DATE_TIME from the epoch of 1970-01-01T00:00:00Z in milliseconds.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| DT_DATE_PARSE(value [,zoneId] [,format, ...])                                  | Converts the given string value to a date time value by using the optional time zone and formats. All formats are used until the first matching format. Without a format, the configured formats are used. Time zone can be NULL, the the configured time zone and locale is used. |
| DT_DATE_FORMAT(value, [,format] [,zoneId])                                     | Formats the given date-time to a string using the given optional format and time zone. Without a format, the first configured format is used. The zone id defaults to the configured zone id.                                                                                      |
| DT_DATE_TO_EPOCH(value)                                                        | Converts the given value to epoch timestamp in millisecond.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| DT_DURATION_NEW(days [,hours, minutes, seconds, nanos])                        | Returns a new DURATION value with the given parameters.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| DT_DURATION_PARSE(value)                                                       | Converts the given ISO-8601 duration string representation to a duration value. E.g. "P2DT3H4M" parses 2 days, 3 hours and 4 minutes.                                                                                                                                              | 
| DT_DURATION_FROM_MILLIS(millis)                                                | Returns a new DURATION value with the given milliseconds.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| DT_DURATION_TO_MILLIS(value)                                                   | Converts the given duration to a milliseconds value.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 
| DT_NOW()                                                                       | Produces a new DATE_TIME that represents the current moment in time.                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| DT_TODAY([zoneId])                                                             | Produces a new DATE_TIME that represents the current date, at midnight (00:00). An optional time zone (string) can be specified, e.g. "America/Sao_Paulo", or "GMT-03:00". If no zone id is specified, the configured zone id is used.                                             |

Commit message:

Adds STR_LENGTH, STR_MATCHES and STR_SUBSTRING (#498)

docs/references/functions.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Standard Functions
nav_order: 3
parent: References
---

## Standard Functions

Available through the _ExpressionConfiguration.StandardFunctionsDictionary_ constant:

### Basic Functions

| Name                                                                      | Description                                                                                                                                     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ABS(value)                                                                | Absolute (non-negative) value                                                                                                                   |
| AVERAGE(value, ...)                                                       | Returns the average (arithmetic mean) of all parameters.                                                                                        |
| CEILING(value)                                                            | Rounds the given value an integer using the rounding mode CEILING                                                                               |
| COALESCE(value, ...)                                                      | Returns the first non-null parameter, or NULL if all parameters are null                                                                        |
| FACT(base)                                                                | Calculates the factorial of a base value                                                                                                        |
| FLOOR(value)                                                              | Rounds the given value an integer using the rounding mode FLOOR                                                                                 |
| IF(condition, resultIfTrue, resultIfFalse)                                | Conditional evaluation function. If _condition_ is true, the _resultIfTrue_ is returned, else the _resultIfFalse_ value                         |
| LOG(value)                                                                | The natural logarithm (base e) of a value                                                                                                       |
| LOG10(value)                                                              | The base 10 logarithm of a value                                                                                                                |
| MAX(value, ...)                                                           | Returns the maximum value of all parameters. If a parameter is of type _ARRAY_, the maximum of all elements is calculated.                      |
| MIN(value, ...)                                                           | Returns the minimum value of all parameters. If a parameter is of type _ARRAY_, the minimum of all elements is calculated.                      |
| NOT(value)                                                                | Boolean negation, implemented as a function (for compatibility)                                                                                 |
| RANDOM()                                                                  | Produces a random value between 0 and 1                                                                                                         |
| ROUND(value, scale)                                                       | Rounds the given value to the specified scale, using the current rounding mode                                                                  |
| SQRT(value)                                                               | Square root function. Uses the implementation from _The Java Programmers Guide To numerical Computing_ by Ronald Mak, 2002.                     |
| SUM(value, ...)                                                           | Returns the sum of all parameters. If a parameter is of type _ARRAY_, the sum of all elements is calculated.                                    |
| SWITCH(expression, value1, result1, [value2-N, result2-N ...], [default]) | Returns the _result_ correponding to the first matching _value_ in the specified _expression_ or an optional _default_ value if no match found. |

### String Functions

| Name                                | Description                                                                                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| STR_CONTAINS(string, substring)     | Returns true if the string contains the substring (case-insensitive)                                                                          |
| STR_ENDS_WITH(string, substring)    | Returns true if the string ends with the substring (case-sensitive)                                                                           |
| STR_FORMAT(format [,argument, ...]) | Returns a formatted string using the specified format string and arguments, using the configured locale                                       |
| STR_LENGTH(string)                  | Returns the length of the string                                                                                                              |
| STR_LOWER(value)                    | Converts the given value to lower case                                                                                                        |
| STR_MATCHES(string, pattern)        | Returns true if the string matches the RegEx pattern                                                                                          |
| STR_STARTS_WITH(string, substring)  | Returns true if the string starts with the substring (case-sensitive)                                                                         |
| STR_SUBSTRING(string, start[, end]) | Returns a substring of the given string, starting at the _start_ index and ending at the _end_ index (the end of the string if not specified) |
| STR_TRIM(string)                    | Returns the given string with all leading and trailing space removed.                                                                         |
| STR_UPPER(value)                    | Converts the given value to upper case                                                                                                        |

### Trigonometric Functions

| Name         | Description                                                                                    |
|--------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ACOS(value)  | Returns the arc-cosine (in degrees)                                                            |
| ACOSH(value) | Returns the hyperbolic arc-cosine                                                              |
| ACOSR(value) | Returns the arc-cosine (in radians)                                                            |
| ACOT(value)  | Returns the arc-co-tangent (in degrees)                                                        |
| ACOTH(value) | Returns the hyperbolic arc-co-tangent (in degrees)                                             |
| ACOTR(value) | Returns the arc-co-tangent (in radians)                                                        |
| ASIN(value)  | Returns the arc-sine (in degrees)                                                              |
| ASINH(value) | Returns the hyperbolic arc-sine                                                                |
| ASINR(value) | Returns the arc-sine (in radians)                                                              |
| ATAN2(y, x)  | Returns the angle of atan2 (in degrees)                                                        |
| ATAN2R(y, x) | Returns the angle of atan2 (in radians)                                                        |
| ATAN(value)  | Returns the arc-tangent (in degrees)                                                           |
| ATANH(value) | Returns the hyperbolic arc-tangent                                                             |
| ATANR(value) | Returns the arc-tangent (in radians)                                                           |
| COS(value)   | Returns the cosine of an angle (in degrees)                                                    |
| COSH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic cosine of a value                                                       |
| COSR(value)  | Returns the cosine of an angle (in radians)                                                    |
| COT(value)   | Returns the co-tangent of an angle (in degrees)                                                |
| COTH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic co-tangent of a value                                                   |
| COTR(value)  | Returns the co-tangent of an angle (in radians)                                                |
| CSC(value)   | Returns the co-secant of an angle (in degrees)                                                 |
| CSCH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic co-secant of a value                                                    |
| CSCR(value)  | Returns the co-secant of an angle (in radians)                                                 |
| DEG(rad)     | Converts an angle measured in radians to an approximately equivalent angle measured in degrees |
| RAD(degrees) | Converts an angle measured in degrees to an approximately equivalent angle measured in radians |
| SEC(value)   | Returns the secant of an angle (in degrees)                                                    |
| SECH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic secant of an angle                                                      |
| SECR(value)  | Returns the secant of an angle (in radians)                                                    |
| SIN(value)   | Returns the sine of an angle (in degrees)                                                      |
| SINH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic sine of a value                                                         |
| SINR(value)  | Returns the sine of an angle (in radians)                                                      |
| TAN(value)   | Returns the tangent of an angle (in degrees)                                                   |
| TANH(value)  | Returns the hyperbolic tangent of a value                                                      |
| TANR(value)  | Returns the tangent of an angle (in radians)                                                   |

### Date Time Functions

| Name                                                                           | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| DT_DATE_NEW(year, month, day [,hour, minute, second, millis, nanos] [,zoneId]) | Returns a new DATE_TIME value with the given parameters. An optional time zone (string) can be specified, e.g. "Europe/Berlin", or "GMT+02:00". If no zone id is specified, the configured zone id is used.                                                                        |
| DT_DATE_NEW(millis)                                                            | Returns a new DATE_TIME from the epoch of 1970-01-01T00:00:00Z in milliseconds.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| DT_DATE_PARSE(value [,zoneId] [,format, ...])                                  | Converts the given string value to a date time value by using the optional time zone and formats. All formats are used until the first matching format. Without a format, the configured formats are used. Time zone can be NULL, the the configured time zone and locale is used. |
| DT_DATE_FORMAT(value, [,format] [,zoneId])                                     | Formats the given date-time to a string using the given optional format and time zone. Without a format, the first configured format is used. The zone id defaults to the configured zone id.                                                                                      |
| DT_DATE_TO_EPOCH(value)                                                        | Converts the given value to epoch timestamp in millisecond.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| DT_DURATION_NEW(days [,hours, minutes, seconds, nanos])                        | Returns a new DURATION value with the given parameters.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| DT_DURATION_PARSE(value)                                                       | Converts the given ISO-8601 duration string representation to a duration value. E.g. "P2DT3H4M" parses 2 days, 3 hours and 4 minutes.                                                                                                                                              | 
| DT_DURATION_FROM_MILLIS(millis)                                                | Returns a new DURATION value with the given milliseconds.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| DT_DURATION_TO_MILLIS(value)                                                   | Converts the given duration to a milliseconds value.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 
| DT_NOW()                                                                       | Produces a new DATE_TIME that represents the current moment in time.                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| DT_TODAY([zoneId])                                                             | Produces a new DATE_TIME that represents the current date, at midnight (00:00). An optional time zone (string) can be specified, e.g. "America/Sao_Paulo", or "GMT-03:00". If no zone id is specified, the configured zone id is used.                                             |
